# Homework 4 - Buddy Flask

## Summary

NASA records the trajectory of the International Space Station through position and velocity data. However, there is an abundance of this data as they measure and record at four minute intervals across 15 days. The objective of this project is to develop a Flask app (located in `iss_tracker.py`) that will help in querying and sifting through the ISS trajectory dataset. This is important because it can save time in understanding the data and the Flask app can also help with calculating additional information with the data, such as the instantaneous speed of the ISS at a certain time. 

## ISS Trajectory Dataset

The `iss_tracker` Flask app uses a ISS trajectory dataset generated by ISS Trajectory Operations and Planning Officer (TOPO) flight controllers in the Mission Control Center at NASA’s JSC and it is located at [this link](https://spotthestation.nasa.gov/trajectory_data.cfm) in both .txt and .xml formats. This dataset has information about the state vectors position {X, Y, Z} and velocity {X\_DOT, Y\_DOT, Z\_DOT} of the ISS along with the Epoch, or time stamp, and this data is recorded at four minute intervals over 15 days. The data is updated about three times a week so that the ISS Flight Control Team has accurate trajectory estimates, which is important since this dataset is used to maintain communication links and ensure that the ISS isn't at risk of any potential collisions.

## Flask App

The ISS Tracker Flask App, located in the `iss_tracker.py` script, helps with processing the .xml file with the ISS trajectory data into a dictionary and querying the position and velocity at specific epochs and calculating instantaneous speed of the ISS at a specific time. The end user uses routes (such as `/`, `/epochs`, `/epochs/<epoch>`, `epochs/<epoch>/speed`) to return certain information about the dataset.

### Instructions

In order to run the Flask app and query through the dataset using routes, open two SSH terminals on your machine so that you can run the Flask app on one terminal and query using the Flask app with the other one. In Terminal #1, first clone this repository to your local system using `git clone git@github.com:sreshaven/my-coe332-hws.git`. Next, change your current directory using `cd my-coe322-hws/homework04/`. Now run the Flask app by running the command `flask --app iss_tracker --debug run`. In Terminal #2, query through the dataset using the routes and examples listed in [Examples](##examples).

### Examples
While the flask app is running (in the background or in another terminal on the same machine) use these examples to guide you in querying through the dataset.

To expose the all of the current ISS trajectory data points available, run `curl http://127.0.0.1:5000/`. Since this is a large dataset, to read only n first lines, run `curl http://127.0.0.1:5000/ | head -n D` and replace D with the number of lines you want to read. Below is an example of what `curl http://127.0.0.1:5000/ | head -n 30` looks like:
```
[
  {
    "EPOCH": "2023-048T12:00:00.000Z",
    "X": {
      "#text": "-5097.51711371908",
      "@units": "km"
    },
    "X_DOT": {
      "#text": "-4.5815461024513304",
      "@units": "km/s"
    },
    "Y": {
      "#text": "1610.3574036042901",
      "@units": "km"
    },
    "Y_DOT": {
      "#text": "-4.8951801207083303",
      "@units": "km/s"
    },
    "Z": {
      "#text": "-4194.4848049601396",
      "@units": "km"
    },
    "Z_DOT": {
      "#text": "3.70067961081915",
      "@units": "km/s"
    }
  },
  {
    "EPOCH": "2023-048T12:04:00.000Z",
```

To get a list of all of the Epochs or timestamps in the dataset currently, run `curl http://127.0.0.1:5000/epochs`. Below is a example of what the list that is returned can look like:
```
[
  "2023-048T12:00:00.000Z",
  "2023-048T12:04:00.000Z",
  "2023-048T12:08:00.000Z",
  "2023-048T12:12:00.000Z",
  "2023-048T12:16:00.000Z",
  "2023-048T12:20:00.000Z",
  "2023-048T12:24:00.000Z",
  "2023-048T12:28:00.000Z",
  "2023-048T12:32:00.000Z",
  "2023-048T12:36:00.000Z",
  "2023-048T12:40:00.000Z",
  "2023-048T12:44:00.000Z",
  "2023-048T12:48:00.000Z",
  "2023-048T12:52:00.000Z",
  "2023-048T12:56:00.000Z",
  "2023-048T13:00:00.000Z",
  "2023-048T13:04:00.000Z",
...
```

To get the state vectors for position and velocity of the ISS at a specific Epoch from the data set, run `curl http://127.0.0.1:5000/epochs/<epoch>` and replace \<epoch\> with an Epoch from the list of Epochs for the dataset. This will return position {X, Y, Z} in units of km and velocity {X\_DOT, Y\_DOT, Z\_DOT} in units of km/s at that Epoch. Below is an example of what `curl http://127.0.0.1:5000/epochs/2023-063T12:00:00.000Z` looks like: 

> **_Note:_** You may not receive the same output if this specific command is run since the dataset may have updated with new Epochs.
```
{
  "EPOCH": "2023-063T12:00:00.000Z",
  "X": 2820.04422055639,
  "X_DOT": 5.03758258209994,
  "Y": -5957.89709645725,
  "Y_DOT": 0.7849431605754,
  "Z": 1652.06986538037,
  "Z_DOT": -5.71919131509608
}
```

To get the instantaneous speed of the ISS for a specific Epoch in the dataset, run `curl http://127.0.0.1:5000/epochs/<epoch>/speed` and replace \<epoch\> with an Epoch from the list of Epochs for the dataset. Below is an example of what `curl http://127.0.0.1:5000/epochs/2023-063T12:00:00.000Z/speed` looks like:

> **_Note:_** You may not receive the same output if this specific command is run since the dataset may have updated with new Epochs.
```
7.661757196327827 km/s
```
